[Music]
thank you bye good lucke thank you
byee Chris I'm very happy that you're
here H we cannot hear you
now uh okay sorry for the delay in
joining I'm glad to be here
now very happy that you're here if you
want to
start yeah when yeah
um well welcome everyone um it's uh
great to see so many people on a Friday
evening giving up their their time to to
join on rck and uh his colleagues and uh
many thanks onri for uh inviting me and
for organizing uh the event um if I say
a little bit about myself my name is
chrism um I live in the UK um uh my
professional background is in social
work and uh I did that for many years
and then moved into the NHS and um
worked um more almost exclusively around
transforming Mental Health Services to
make them more aligned with uh recovery
uh values and
principles um I did that for a number of
years until I uh reached the point of
accepting uh that um we were only making
inroads at the
margins and uh really the NHS were only
conceding ground that they were ready to
concede anyway so I did feel that the
whole process of my involvement but also
many of my colleagues as well um was was
very tokenistic um and um the whole
recovery movement for me in the United
Kingdom had become um colonized by uh
professionals by
institutions and lost its um original
sort of um civil rights uh um a momentum
H and uh the the delivery of um um um
campaigning for uh significant change
not just you know uh little bits of um
progress in areas that uh were far from
the uh the central um uh deliberation of
um of myself and my uh lived experienced
colleagues here in the UK so uh because
of that dissatisfaction
I then moved back into Academia I had
been a visiting lecturer since the early
2000s and um uh mainly working at har
University uh we were very uh um
supportive of the recovery movement as
it uh came to our Shores and harer
University was the first uh uh academic
institution that set up a
a center for mental health recovery it
was a real Pathfinder time and um we uh
were in operation for about four years
and uh really did uh make some inroads
and uh certainly um influenced the
thinking of um uh clinicians social
workers occupational therapists um all
sorts of professions um but sometimes
that was an uphill slog uh because we
were trying to turn round um attitudes
of care through control and um care
through compliance and uh care through
pharmacology um throughout all of my uh
working life I've always also uh
struggled to U manage my own uh lived
experience of mental illness um I
remember hearing Bo
uh at a preschool age I was probably
three or four when I first sensed that I
was different from my peers um that what
I heard um wasn't a a common experience
for for everyone else and I became quite
ashamed and uh guilty about them because
my voices were always very
derogatory um uh trying to sort of uh
get me to do bad things um to think
badly of myself um and were always
intrusive um it was very difficult when
I moved into school uh age and uh tried
to progress and uh uh manage the
academic expectations while at the same
time having voices that were telling me
to go kill myself [__] off you're
worthless you'll never amount to
anything you're a complete failure
so um I'm sure many of you here you know
have heard that sort of um uh testimony
before but it's something that you know
has really sort of marked my life and
from time to time when I've been in
crisis I've had to access mental health
uh support um both in acute settings and
um in the community and um you know um
my experience is that I didn't have any
violence or aggression um um uh directed
at me but I certainly observed that
happening to other um service users and
patients uh although I was subject uh
routinely to uh
humiliations uh through uh shouting at
me um through uh informing me that if I
didn't tow the line my medical records
would show that I was a troublemaker and
that they would never let me go so um
you know uh even though I had a an
understanding of the mental health
system as a social worker it didn't
prepare me for the reality of being uh
within those
Services um and over time um those
experiences uh made me decide to do
something um outside of the system and
try to affect change from outside
because my attempt to work within the
structures and through in within those
uh uh silos um uh produced very um uh
little um uh
unsubstantial and material change so I
have found uh uh working within Academia
where I teach students and I call upon
uh my professional uh background in
social work but also my lived experience
of accessing services so um I've found
that uh experience extremely uh
cathartic and extremely um beneficial to
me um it gives me an opportunity to uh
share those experiences for um people
that are going to be out there
delivering those services and uh I try
and instill within them the principles
of having an unconditional high regard
for each and every person and in each
and every setting and at each and every
time um there should be no discrimin
ation um there should be no caveats uh
you know those uh those High values and
high principles should apply everywhere
and to everyone um but also research um
I first became involved with an HRI in
uh a project uh where we uh are involved
in a paneuropean study into Institute
tional violence and I was a lead author
um and I wrote a chapter of 10,000 Words
which uh
articulated uh victims within the United
Kingdom who uh were uh subject to um
humiliation violence uh sexual assault
um verbal intent uh uh um aggression
uh threats implied threats lots of
coercion um and even though I'd had that
lived experience myself I wasn't
prepared wholly for some of the accounts
that were shared with me um and um it
took many months before the cohort that
I was fortunate to assemble it took many
months to build up a trust and a report
for and to prepare the ground for um uh
people telling me their their stories um
which really was how I approached my
social work uh role um it was always
about listening to individuals accounts
of their lives rather than uh being
overly concerned with professional
reports that were detailing that
person's lives so always believe in the
first person narrative and the power and
the impacts of that so um we we agreed
with that with it within the group um a
terms of reference uh that bound us all
together um and uh for me it was all
about uh a social work uh approach which
is called uh permission preparedness and
pace
um so it was with a permission of the
cohort um how they wish to share their
story um it was uh preparedness on my
part to be to be receptive to be calm to
listen far more than I
spoke um and it was working at the pace
that worked for everyone um and slowly
but surely we were able to draw out some
of the themes from those shattering
experiences and um we agreed uh that I
would write a thousand words um then I
would share that amongst my co- research
as
co-authors um for their comments
amendments then I would work that in and
then I would resend the uh the uh
thousand words back to them and then I
would work on another thousand words and
then we did that constantly refreshing
working with consent and it really was
and I know it sounds quite try but I was
holding the pen but it was the cohort
that were guiding that pen and it was
their words that I was writing as much
as possible I I do believe that um when
it comes to recording uh the accounts of
uh people um uh who have experienced
such such trauma that we really
shouldn't uh uh stray into areas of
editing reauthoring or
reframing so um I do believe uh uh I
don't know what other colleagues present
feel but I've come across um pieces of
research and studies from people with a
lived
experience and um it's quite
impenetrable you know um it's almost as
if um people with a lived experience are
desperate to find uh the Acclaim of
their academic and professional
colleagues by being as Technical and
rigid in their research as possible but
for me um it was important to not over
professionalize or over academicz the
the process I wanted it to be a piece of
work that everybody could access um and
that didn't mean dumbing it down and uh
making it simple but I just wanted it to
be accessible to everyone and that was
certainly one of the priorities from the
cohort so um bit by bit we we got the
10,000 words um ready and uh in fact
there there were about 12 chapters that
other colleagues were working on and um
we were the only group that was uh
driven entirely by lived experience and
we were the first to submit and uh there
was very little reworking that we had to
do um once the editor had uh the
submitted copy very few uh bits of
rework and uh uh now at is with the
Publishers and they're happy with the
way it's been written and recorded and
one of the priorities with people um was
that um their anonymity was absolutely
protected um people were so fearful of
uh
retaliation and retribution coming their
way for uh Having the courage to
honestly uh retell those stories
and they had tried to uh raise concerns
at their uh poor treatment um in many
cases um but I don't know what people's
experiences are of um trying to complain
uh about institutional uh failings but
it is uh a mindfield and uh it's like a
silo within a silo and it's like a maze
within a maze and a puzzle without a key
um it's very difficult to um find the
stamina and the well uh the support to
really see a complaint through um
because there are so many attempts to
deflect uh what you trying to say uh to
diminish it and uh to dismiss it um if
you consider um some of the assumptions
that are out there in in the general
public about people with mental illness
that um um they're confused they're
delusional they're not
trustworthy um especially if you come
across um people with a diagnosis of
Personality Disorder when there can be
added to those uh um slurs um that
people are
malicious um
manipulative and malign um and trying to
um impact your complaint uh whilst
coming up against all of those um blocks
and barriers and obstacles is
extremely uh difficult and um I don't
know about other people in other
countries but the NH CH here is rever
revered absolutely revered and in many
cases that's
Justified um uh but not in all cases and
there's an
unwillingness to accept that sometimes
in some places some people do terrible
things and commit terrible harm and
leave people
traumatized um I I of and share with
International colleagues that um in the
UK um if you have a learning disability
or if you have a diagnosis of mental
illness you are the only patient group
that gets called a service
user yeah uh if I had
cancer I'd be referred to as a cancer
patient if I was diabetic I'd be
referred to as having
diabetes uh but because I have a mental
illness I'm not classed in the same uh
respect as uh those other domains
because I'm a mental health patient I am
a service user and I'm aart from other
uh groups um and the same goes for
learning
disability and and if you look at the uh
uh the recorded uh crimes against uh
patients it's largely uh within the
mental health community and in the
learning disability community and for me
that says a great deal about
othering um uh uh it's almost that uh uh
some people regard us as uh not
necessarily unworthy but when we
complain or assert ourselves there are
all sorts of um assumptions made about
our
motivations um and there are still
people out there who consider mental
illness as being a mental
defect um I've often come across um
paperwork um from the 197 s and the
1980s where people with mental illness
are still referred to as being imbeciles
and
kettins um now really they should have
been left uh back in the 19th century um
but um that still
prevails um when we close down the long
stay
institutions in the
1970s and uh repatriated people to the
community uh because of the massive
amount of concern uh that was focused on
those institutions about the quality of
care the quality of treatment and the
safety of patients but when we uh
repatriated them to the community which
was a a very good thing um how did we
staff those new
Services largely we staffed them with
the people that worked in those
institutions which were found to be not
fit for
purpose and that is
why the Community Care in the UK is
still tainted and contaminated from some
of those attitudes and
assumptions um and for me it's all about
rights Justice and
accountability um we have a right to be
safe we have a right to therapeutic
treatment uh we seek Justice when things
go wrong when people are forcefully
medicated when they have their records
uh
falsified um when they're pinned down
and FAL
medicated um these things cannot be
justified and when that happens we seek
accountability um but there's always um
caveated accountability one of the
phrases I don't know if this happen in
uh places where but where you uh live
and work but uh when there's an inquiry
here into the safety of Services there's
always um uh a a response saying that
lessons will be
learned well it's about time that those
lessons were learned we can't keep
rolling out that line that lessons will
be learned because that simply isn't
good enough um I think one of the things
that holds back the service user and
patient movement in the UK
is that we are too
nice um we are too understanding uh
we're too polite um I'd like to see some
of the assertive action um that uh other
countries and other patient and service
user groups take we need to insist and
demand that change happens not over the
long term some of the things that could
bring about change don't need wholesale
uh investment and
transformation there are some quick wins
that could be put in place very very
easily but that doesn't happen because
the institutions are so preoccupied with
their
reputation and their
standards uh within the uh inspection uh
and uh scrutiny Realm
um but they just won't own fully what's
happened what are the failings and what
steps have been
taken to ensure that this won't happen
again and for me part of the rights and
Justice is I believe anyone that's been
uh treated violently uh or with
disrespect uh that have been humiliated
um are entitled to
reparations proper
reparations not just for them but those
that care for them as well their family
members their friends who have to pick
up those pieces and proceed afterwards
and support them with that trauma that
will be a legacy for them um so
apologies aren't enough it's about
systematic and uh sustained change some
institution fail so
consistently they shouldn't have a
future they shouldn't have a present and
I believe that service users service
users should be front and center of an
entirely independent and new body that
scrutinizes and audits these
institutions and had the power to
discipline
dismantle and
dismiss now when I share this with um um
some of the institutions here in the UK
you know I I I can see a sharp intake of
breath um very few people would disagree
with me or challenge me um a head on but
there is an assumption that um you know
that's unrealistic and I would just say
that we need to be more ambitious and
more
Fearless um we are too uh akin to uh
listening to The Narrative of
Institutions that we're doing our best
we've got limited uh resources we have
political pressures made upon us well
that's not our problem that's your
problem you've got to do something about
that um I'm not quite sure uh how much
uh longi wanted me to go on for H it I
think I've come to the end of um uh what
I had intended to say um I don't know if
you want to take questions now or later
on you decide this
comes it connects with what we last
commented with danus about the buning of
coercive measures you are saying it for
you know Center and front the users as
you can dismiss and discipline people
that is really abusing you yeah I was
anybody wish to ask anything if not you
can continue Chris it's wonderful okay
yeah I'm happy for any questions do feel
free I I have a question I I don't I
don't know where I am in the queue but
I'm just going to throw it out out here
hi Chris uh hi I I'm so sorry I missed
the introduction and I asked in chat for
someone to explain and enri graciously
kind of gave you an introduction
probably didn't do you justice but um I
I love your
presentation um I don't even know where
to begin I have so many questions um and
other people might want want it have
their questions answered so I well Sarah
I could give you some of the background
I shared before you miss yeah yeah um my
name is Chris man I I live in the UK um
I got a professional background in
social work and did that for many years
and um across different care groups I
worked with children and U families I
worked in
safeguarding um I also worked with uh
Juvenile Justice uh trying to uh prevent
Young damaged people being uh given
punitive
sentences uh in custody which for me was
monstrous and still is if if there's one
thing that angers me is when I see young
damaged men and women going into prisons
you know I can't think of anything more
punitive and damaging to people that
have already been traumatized so that
that's a bit of my background but really
uh what what I was sharing was uh the
research that I'm doing now um so uh one
of the pieces of research that I
recently did was to be a lead author on
a paneuropean study into institutional
violence uh and I was talking about that
um but yeah really my my position is
that I work from outside the system now
to affect change because I became so
demoralized at trying to chip away from
within the service and um my attempts
being corporatized colonized and coopted
by the dominant uh
institution does that help Sarah give a
bit of context oh that helps enormously
thank you so much uh I too work outside
the system I work for an organization
called Mind Freedom International and I
come to this work I've been doing
activism um which you could Loosely
Define as
promoting human rights in the mental
health system in the global mental
health system I come to this work uh
from not as a um you don't like the word
service user so I'm not going to use the
word um consumer I am a consumer mental
health system but um uh consumer mental
health systems but I I'm happy with my
mental health services so I don't come
to this work uh uh through my own bad
experiences in the mental health system
I come to this work to my daughter's
and I wish um I'm I'm inclined to share
my daughter's story but but you have
more experience um in the area of
obtaining impeccable permissions from
people and um my daughter is not able to
coherently tell her story yet so um I
want to tell my story as an eyewitness
only what I've seen yeah and and hurt
and um I it's kind of like how do you
how do you advise me
to to come to a consensus with my
daughter who you know is in and out of
reality consensus based reality how how
do you advise me to go about the process
of getting permission to tell my my
daughter story of of a person who was
subjected to state sponsored violence to
torture psychiatric torture yeah um what
what are what do what how do you advise
me to go you you know tell her story
publicly well I I would certainly try to
talk to your daughter when she's um um
more um present about uh uh the
possibility of the two of you
collaborating at times where she is
present sort of mentally and and
emotionally and feeling secure enough to
do so but if that's not possible I think
as Tera um you know you're close to that
first person narrative as you can be uh
and also you've got your own narrative
as your daughter's carer um and I think
um that I don't know what other
colleagues uh have to say but even if
your daughter was reticent for her to be
Central uh to to uh trying to tell that
story you are are are I believe entirely
free to share your uh story your lived
experience of uh trying to support
someone um that has been so
tragically uh harmed and poorly treated
poorly
understood um by the system with no
accountability um uh no
ownership um and left you and your
daughter um feeling absolutely abused
and victim prised so I do believe that
even if your daughter is reticent um I
still believe that you have your lived
experience to share um how does how does
that sit with you
Sarah that that sits really well with me
because I hear you saying that there's
validity in my
experience as a a
caregiver um and a carer and so um I
feel empowered by your response but it
doesn't completely you know like answer
my question because then it leaves me to
be a judge well is my daughter like
speaking you know what is what because
her her position is always changing and
and and and um yes so you know there
there are times when our stories are in
alignment and we are in consensus but
then there's other sides of her that um
she had in my opinion had to develop
different ways of coping with being
institutionalized so she developed a
kind of a personality to deal with that
the daytoday horrors yeah and so she she
that side of her personality and me are
not in consensus you know so maybe Sarah
maybe that is a central part for your
story about that
conflicting um sort of uh narrative
where at times your daughter is is very
focused on the harm that she suffered
and at other times it may shift um and
the content and narrative may change uh
and that's part of the the harm that's
been done to her she may not uh have
that
consistency um but your obs obervations
are also um um uh valid as well and part
of that um that confliction that your
daughter has is part of the story that
you're both struggling with um and it's
interesting here you know in the UK you
know I'm not always um uh well regarded
by some of my servitude of colleagues
you know are there are colleagues out
there who um um uh actually think that
institutions are doing a great job and
that I'm a bit of a
troublemaker um some people like being
given lots and lots of medication so
that they're barely functioning I don't
believe in that um I believe that we all
have a right to live a life that's
outside of the dim unlit world of being
sedated on on a on a day byday basis
we're all entitled to life and I'm not
anti medication but I'm I'm I'm against
medication uh that is on the highest
dose uh that's not reviewed
consistently um and where the prescriber
doesn't have a dialogue with the person
that they're prescribing to you know I
just feel that um I know that for me I
spent 10 years on um uh controlled
antipsychotics and uh I robbed my two
daughters of a father for 10 years
because all I did was slept at slept at
slept at and you know they were
traumatized as much as I was by that
experience um so yeah it's always a
struggle uh Sarah but I feel that you
have a valid story yourself that should
be
heard and I wish you and your daughter
well thank you I have other questions
too as well but I for you but I I I
don't want to you know hog all the
questions so I'll you know I'm happy to
share my email details if you wanted to
enri if you wanted to share my email
details that's absolutely fine
thank you Chris that's very generous of
you take care Sarah thank you thank you
Chris anybody else wants to to ask if
not that I feel free I will
say I will make your question Chris yeah
do you believe
that the the W ordeal was for shaning
you to have the voices to begin with if
that was accepted would not have been
interested to the point that you were
feeling bad about yourself this is one
of the issues asking because I recently
learned that many people doesn't have
any voice at all I mean it is part of
the normal yeah and
why yeah you know I I I learned very
late that um um hearing voices does not
have to be a psychotic symptom um for me
my my understanding is that I was the
victim of uh uh childhood sexual um uh
uh incestuous sexual
abuse and there is a proven correlation
between victims of uh childhood sexual
abuse and the development of voices
voice hearing you know there's lots of
research that um has found that to be
the case so I definitely feel that um uh
I certainly suffer with paranoia I
certainly do suffer for paranoia and uh
and for that I have a very small dose of
alipin to sort of help keep that in
check um but yeah my belief and really
it is about our beliefs about diagnosis
and symptoms you know one of the really
freeing things about one of uh my other
uh problems has been uh alcoholism um
fortunately I've been sober for the last
11 years and it's been the greatest 11
years of my life uh the freedom from
alcoholism and uh the wonderful thing
about alcoholism it doesn't matter about
what other people believe it's what you
believe you know no one cares if the
doctor tells them they're an alcoholic
it's for you to decide if you're an
alcoholic and for me I know that I
struggle with voices with
paranoia um um uh but I I I largely am
able to manage that myself um and I
found ways of living uh a more
productive life outside of the service
rather than within but it's what works
for people I always tried to steer clear
of prescriptive solutions for people
it's what works for you as an individual
yeah thank you Chris Sarah go ahead
thank
you Chris I have another question for
you because you brought up the issue of
par paranoia I I don't use that term a
lot but but I I it's an interesting term
um I I first started looking into
paranoia and I discovered um
the work of a of a a individual named
Pete Peter bulur you might have heard of
Pete no to look that up yeah tell me
about it well Pete Pete is a trauma
survivor he's a sexual trauma Survivor
he lives in the UK um he was formerly
institutionalized and he formed an
organization called the paranoia Network
so I I when I heard about Pete's work um
it was because a an organization called
The Wildflower Alliance which is on Ma
in Massachusetts was sponsoring Pete to
come to uh a state in the eastern United
States called Florida and so when we
found out about him um our family flew
out to Florida and we stayed there um
for the duration of Pete's two-day
training and I found it enormously
helpful for our whole family um to take
the stigma of parent ano off my
daughter's shoulders and for all of us
to explore as a family how how we were
all where we all were on the spectrum of
paranoia and I didn't even realize
before Pete presented this way that uh
paranoia is actually a spectrum and all
all of us fall on the Spectrum and we
kind of come and go on the Spectrum
depending on flate I fluctuate yeah you
know sometimes if someone hasn't replied
uh to a text message within five minutes
I'm absolutely
catastrophizing and and think the worst
possible sort of
reason other times other times I can go
weeks and weeks and weeks and I hardly
notice it um but um it's interesting you
you mentioning that that guy one of the
things that helped me uh re-evaluate my
relationship with my voices was Ron
Coleman have you come across Ron Coleman
oh yeah I just got back from um their
house in the aisle of Lewis two weeks
ago I know I know Ron and Karen well and
their yeah and and certainly you know
for years and years and years I was told
by mental health professionals do not
listen to your voices and definitely you
don't talk to them and I met Ron and
Karen and they encouraged me to have a
dialogue with my voices and that has
made more progress than years and years
and years of
counseling uh antis psychotic
medication and uh institutional care it
was so liberating it really was um yeah
I can't talk more highly in other there
and you talking about your whole family
going to see this person in Florida you
know the things that uh have helped me
um have helped my family and my friends
and we all share in that and it helps
them understand me but it also helps me
understand
them um and and I was thinking of you
Sarah that certainly in the UK um there
there still is this sense that um carers
particularly family members are are
somehow implicit in uh someone's illness
uh that they are an active uh element to
to that uh illness and for me that
that's a form of fascism you know I I
see families as potential allies um in
in the struggle to to manage the the
illness um and they shouldn't be seen uh
through suspicious eyes as as part the
problem we've got to leave those those
assumptions uh where they belong in the
distant
past thank you Chris looking forward to
read your chapter it
sorry it must be
wonderful thank you sorry no do you know
when it's going to be published because
I havea talking about it going it's with
the Publishers now so they're talking
about going to print uh uh January next
year I've been in contact with nutmeg
nutmeg H I think you know don't you onri
and that's her uh recent response to me
that it should be about January next
year so when it's published perhaps
we'll all come together and and and
celebrate
that I certainly won't be working for
the NHS
[Laughter]
anymore thank you everyone I think I'll
leave it there hre if that's okay with
you and give others a chance but I'm
gonna stay I'm gonna stay and listen to
everyone else now it's sat's turn and
you turn